rāmasakha: kvāpi dine kāmada bhagavan gato bhavān vipinam |
sūnubhirapi gopānāṃ dhenubhirabhisaṃvṛto lasadveṣa: ||1||
rāmasakha:	in Balaraama's company
kvāpi dine	one day
kāmada bhagavan	Thou the fulfiller of wishes, O Lord!
gata: bhavān	went Thee
vipinam	to the forest
sūnubhi:-api	with the sons,also
gopānām	of the Gopas
dhenubhi:-abhisaṃvṛta:	(and) by the cows surrounded
lasat-veṣa:	in a bedecked attire
O Lord! Thou the fulfiller of wishes, one day in a bedecked attire, with Balaraama, went to the forest. The sons of the Gopas and the cows also surrounded and followed Thee.
sandarśayan balāya svairaṃ vṛndāvanaśriyaṃ vimalām |
kāṇḍīrai: saha bālairbhāṇḍīrakamāgamo vaṭaṃ krīḍan ||2||
sandarśayan	showing around
balāya svairaṃ	to Balaraama joyfully
vṛndāvana-śriyaṃ	the beauty of Vrindaavana
vimalām	(which was so) pure
kāṇḍīrai: saha	with sticks (carrying)
bālai:-	(with) the children (Thou reached)
bhāṇḍīrakam-	(the tree named) Bhaandeeraka
āgama:	reached
vaṭaṃ krīḍan	the tree, playing
Joyfully showing around the unspoilt pure beauty of Vrindaavana to Balaraama, accompanied by the cowherd boys, carrying a staff in a playful mood, Thou reached the banyan tree called Bhaandeeraka.
tāvattāvakanidhanaspṛhayālurgopamūrtiradayālu: |
daitya: pralambanāmā pralambabāhuṃ bhavantamāpede ||3||
tāvat-	then
tāvaka-nidhana-	Thy death
spṛhayālu:-gopamūrti:	desiring, in the disguise of a Gopa
adayālu: daitya:	a pitiless demon
pralamba-nāmā	Pralamba named
pralamba-bāhuṃ bhavantam-	the long armed Thee
āpede	approached
Then, the pitiless demon, approached Thee in the disguise of a Gopa, desiring to kill Thee, who are with long arms.
jānannapyavijānanniva tena samaṃ nibaddhasauhārda: |
vaṭanikaṭe paṭupaśupavyābaddhaṃ dvandvayuddhamārabdhā: ||4||
jānan-api	knowing though
avijānan-iva	not knowing as though
tena samaṃ	with him
nibaddha-sauhārda:	cultivating friendship
vaṭa-nikaṭe	near the banyan tree
paṭu-paśupa-	by skilled cowherd boys
vyābaddhaṃ	formed
dvandva-yuddham-	wrestling
ārabdhā:	started (Thee)
In spite of knowing fully well of his intention, seemingly unaware of his designs, Thou cultivated friendship with him. Then near the banyan tree, arranging the game of wrestling with the cowherd boys who were skilled in that art, Thou started a duel.
gopān vibhajya tanvan saṅghaṃ balabhadrakaṃ bhavatkamapi |
tvadbalabhīruṃ daityaṃ tvadbalagatamanvamanyathā bhagavan ||5||
gopān vibhajya	the cowherd boys dividing
tanvan saṅghaṃ	into two teams
balabhadrakaṃ	of Balaraama
bhavatkam-api	and of Thee also
tvat-bala-bhīruṃ	Thy strength afraid of
daityaṃ	the demon
tvad-bala-gatam-	in Thy team joining
anvamanyathā	(Thou) agreed
bhagavan	O Lord!
O Lord! Thou divided the cowherd boys into two teams led by Balaraama and Thyself. The Asura was aware of Thy strength and being afraid wanted to join Thy team, to which Thou agreed.
kalpitavijetṛvahane samare parayūthagaṃ svadayitataram |
śrīdāmānamadhatthā: parājito bhaktadāsatāṃ prathayan ||6||
kalpita-	as per rules (arranged)
vijetṛ-vahane	the victorious be carried
samare parayūthagaṃ	in the fight, by one of the other team
svadayitataram	very dear to Thee
śrīdāmānam-	Shridaamaa
adhatthā: parājita:	Thou carried, (Thou) being defeated
bhakta-dāsatāṃ	(Thou) as a servant of Thy devotees
prathayan	establishing /demonstrating
As per the rules of the game, as was arranged, the victor is to be carried by the vanquished. Thou being defeated, Thou carried the very dear friend Shreedaamaa, there by demonstrating to the world that Thou are at the service of Thy devotees.
evaṃ bahuṣu vibhūman bāleṣu vahatsu vāhyamāneṣu |
rāmavijita: pralambo jahāra taṃ dūrato bhavadbhītyā ||7||
evaṃ bahuṣu	thus in many
vibhūman	O Infinite One!
bāleṣu vahatsu	when the children were carrying
vāhyamāneṣu	and were being carried
rāma-vijita:	by Balaraama defeated
pralamba: jahāra taṃ	Pralamba (the demon), took him
dūrata: bhavat-bhītyā	far away for Thy fear
Thus the many cowherd boys were carrying and were being carried. In the course, Pralamba was defeated by Balaraama and so he carried Balaraama far away from Thy sight out of fear of Thee.
tvaddūraṃ gamayantaṃ taṃ dṛṣṭvā halini vihitagarimabhare |
daitya: svarūpamāgādyadrūpāt sa hi balo'pi cakito'bhūt ||8||
tvat-dūraṃ gamayantam	from Thee far going
taṃ dṛṣṭvā halini	seeing him when Balaraama
vihita-garima-bhare	took on increased weight
daitya: svarūpam-	the demon to his own form
āgāt-yat-rūpāt	went to by which form
sa hi bala:-api	he indeed Balaraama also
cakita:-abhūt	wonderstruck became
Balaraama saw that he was being carried far away, so he increased his weight by his divine power. The demon then took to his own real form, seeing which even Balaraam was wonderstruck.
uccatayā daityatanostvanmukhamālokya dūrato rāma: |
vigatabhayo dṛḍhamuṣṭyā bhṛśaduṣṭaṃ sapadi piṣṭavānenam ||9||
uccatayā daitya-tano:-	because of the height of the Asura's body
tvat-mukham-	Thy face
ālokya	seeing
dūrata: rāma:	from a distance, Balaraam
vigata-bhaya:	overcoming the fear
dṛḍha-muṣṭyā	by a fierce fist
bhṛśa-duṣṭam sapadi	the extremely wicked (him), quickly
piṣṭvān enam	crushed him
The Asura's height was great and so being carried on his shoulder, Balaraam could see Thee from a distance. At Thy sight Balaraam shunned all fear and with a firm fist struck the demon and quickly crushed him to a pulp.
hatvā dānavavīraṃ prāptaṃ balamāliliṅgitha premṇā |
tāvanmilatoryuvayo: śirasi kṛtā puṣpavṛṣṭiramaragaṇai: ||10||
hatvā dānava-vīraṃ	killing the clever Asura
prāptaṃ balam-	returned Balaraam
āliliṅgitha	(Thou) embraced
premṇā tāvata-	lovingly, at that time
milato:-yuvayo:	when Thou two were meeting
śirasi kṛtā	on Thy heads was done
puṣpavṛṣṭi:-	flower showering
amara-gaṇai:	by the gods/ devas
Balaraama returned after killing the clever Asura and Thou embraced him lovingly. As Thou two were meeting the gods and devas showered flowers on Thy heads.
ālambo bhuvanānāṃ prālambaṃ nidhanamevamāracayan |
kālaṃ vihāya sadyo lolambaruce hare hare: kleśān ||11||
ālamba: bhuvanānāṃ	the support of the worlds
prālambaṃ nidhanam-	Pralambaasura's killing
evam-āracayan	carrying out
kālaṃ vihāya	without delay
sadya:	quickly
lolambaruce	a black bee like splendorous
hare	O Hari
hare:	eradicate
kleśān	my sufferings
O Hari! Thou who has the splendour of a black bee, who are the support of the worlds, Thou who carried out the destruction of Pralambaasura, without delay, quickly eradicate my sufferings.